# Machine learning for discovery of correlates of protection

## Background

Vaccine development takes 10-15 years on average [1], though for some infections that are either rare, slow to progress to disease, or difficult to track, traditional vaccine development methods are extremely challenging. One prominent example is Nipah virus (NiV), for which traditional vaccination efficacy trials are not possible and in fact one study estimated it would either take (depending on trial type) 516 years and 163,000+ vaccine doses or 43 years and 1.83million doses or 7 years and 2.5million doses to run a vaccination trial for NiV. One method to speed up the vaccine development pipeline is to consider correlates of protection as surrogate endpoints in trials. Correlates of protection are typically measurable immune responses that are statistically correlated with protection against disease or infection by a pathogen. Finding correlates of protection and being able to use them as surrogate endpoints can allow the vaccine development pipeline to be accelerated by either utilising a surrogate endpoint to allow a trial to be concluded early, or by informing future decisions or likelihood of success of a vaccine for individual immune responses (thus allowing more targeted future development). Platforms such as ImmPort provide access to study data that can be used to identify correlates of protection. The existing analysis tools in ImmPort Galaxy and in ImmuneSpace (another similar platform) aid identification of immune correlates within a study dataset. They could be made more user-friendly for non-coders / non-statisticians or could incorporate more advanced methods based on machine learning to identify and analyse correlates across study datasets.

## Challenge

Use the provided studies that have been downloaded from ImmPort to develop and demonstrate the power of a platform that can take data in a standardised format and provide visualisations and analysis methods to identify correlates of protection. In the long run (i.e., post-Ideathon), this platform should include: 1) user-friendly tools (in a no-code plug and play style) for identifying correlates within connected study datasets; 2) tools for identify correlates across unconnected study datasets to identify how correlates are similar and how they differ according to key variables (e.g., participant and/or vaccine age). For your prototype, you only need to demonstrate the ability to do one of these. This platform should provide more analysis methods than the current status quo platforms (above) and should be able to offer both classical statistical methods (e.g., GLMs) and machine learning solutions (e.g., representation learning, reinforcement learning, supervised learning, and clustering) – you are not expected to create bespoke models or methods but to interface with existing packages. Your platform should be user-friendly and provide outputs that can be easily understood by downstream stakeholders including regulatory authorities such as MHRA, FDA and others. In your presentation you should demonstrate your prototype in action by uploading data, using your interface to aggregate data and identify potential correlates, and visualise and validate your findings.

## Questions to answer in your presentation

1. How will you work with biostatisticians (those who advise regulatory authorities) in the long-term so your platform can help to formalise the discovered markers?
1. How will you ensure your modelling pipelines generalises to new diseases/vaccines?
1. How would you propose working with government stakeholders (including policymakers and regulators) to ensure that ML methods are embraced, and findings are trusted? How would you balance this against community needs (think about how the accelerated COVID vaccine pipeline was viewed by the public)?
